There are three tests of English Language Proficiency, the TOEFL, the IELTS, and Duolingo. All universities will accept at least one of these exams, and we do not touch on the IELTS because it is not available in Syria. Students should choose to take either the TOEFL or Duolingo exam based on their university lists. The Duolingo exam is historically easier than TOEFL and Duolingo exams are covered for
TOEFL is offered as an IBT (internet-based test) in Person or at home. For students in Syria the test is only offered in the
version, but you may take the test at ALTC in Damascus as needed.
SYE does not support TOEFL unless students can submit proof of official Duolingo score and have a school on their list which does not accept Duolingo.
Discuss your plans to register for the TOEFL with SYE leadership before proceeding.
Under “New Users,” click “Create an Account”
Enter your first, middle, and last name as it appears on your passport.
Enter your date of birth as it appears on your passport.
Enter the email address that you regularly check.
Enter your address and phone number. Choose whether or not you want to receive text messages (please only choose this option if you have reliable cell service).
On the next page, enter your country of birth, native language, and country of citizenship. If you have dual citizenship, use the citizenship with which you would apply to universities.
On the next page, it will ask you if you want to opt-in to TOEFL Search Service, which would allow potential schools to send information about their institutions. It is not necessary to sign up, but you are welcome to do so. Signing up will not give you any advantage in the admissions process.
On the next page, you will be prompted to create a username, password, and security question. These can be whatever you want.
Verify that all of your information is correct. In particular, double check your name, date of birth, and gender, as these cannot be changed once you create your account.
Once you have made your account, go to https://www.ets.org/toefl and click “register now”
On the next page, click “register/ find test centers, dates.” Search the location and range of dates you would like to take the test. Leave “Restricted Reservation Code” blank.
On the next page, choose the date and location you would like to take the TOEFL. Click “Show Test Times and Register” and then click “register” for your chosen time (most will only have 1 time per day).
Take a screenshot of your top three test dates and locations
with your log-in information and the screenshots of your top three test dates and locations. Please indicate your first, second, and third choice test date and location. Once Elysa has received this email, she will complete the registration process. Once the registration is completed, it cannot be changed for free. There is a $60 fee to make any changes, and SYE cannot guarantee that we will cover any change fees, although we can consider requests on a case-by-case basis.
Please make sure you are confident in your registration choices before emailing Elysa the above information.
Once Elysa has emailed you with a confirmation email, please log into your ETS and confirm that all is correct, and add the four universities that you would like your scores sent to automatically. Please review the section of this curriculum on “Score Reporting” before choosing which universities you would like your scores sent to, as some universities will accept self-reported scores. If a university accepts self-reported scores, then please do not include them on the list of universities to which official scores will be sent. Use these free score reports for universities that require official reports.