In order to complete your U.S. applications, you must do the following by the university deadlines:
(or university specific application) and your extra writing supplements as required in the Common App
teacher and counselor recommendations and transcripts submitted
(either through self-reporting or official sends). If applying test optional, you only need to send your English proficiency test
(CSS, ISFAA or other documentation as required by the university)
Many of these tasks cost money. However, there are lots of waivers available and you need to plan ahead to make sure you receive these waivers!
It is your responsibility to understand how to complete the processes to obtain application waivers and to figure out how to report your scores. Most schools will waive the application fees and accept self-reporting, and the process to do so is very simple. However, because each student has a unique college list, and because SYE students apply to, on average, 200 universities a year, it is the responsibility of the student to identify the steps they need to take to get application fee waivers and to report your scores.
We've created two search tools you can use to check the submission path for your university, the payment search tool allows you to enter your university and retrieve all information related to it. The second is a spreadsheet with the same data. We cannot guarantee this data is up to date, so please always double check the university website.  If data is not available for your school, please check the university website to collect it.
For schools students have applied to in the past, we did some work for you and classified each university as:
School has an additional process for securing a waiver
You can request an application waiver through the Common App. You need to indicate proof of the financial burden of the application fee. Choose the option that indicates that your counselor will provide proof of your financial need. On the counselor portal, your counselor will then be able to indicate that they can provide proof of financial need. Likely, this will be the final step in the process, but if the counselor receives communication from the university, they should send a letter  indicating your financial need.
School has an additional process for waiver
You need to check the school website as well as our notes to understand the required process. In some cases, you will need to fill out a form or email the admissions office. Ask your friends in the SYE group chat if you're unsure.
If the school has no waiver available, you need to request payment through the payment form so SYE can cover the fee. SYE will only cover application fees for current SYE students and for universities that offer full scholarships. Please confirm all the details before requesting the fee.
While official Duolingo test scores can be sent for free through the Duolingo website, TOEFL and SAT charge money to send official test scores.
For schools students have applied to in the past, we did some work for you and classified each university as:
School accepts scores sent by your counselor
School accepts scores sent by your counselor or SYE
School accepts scores reported in the Common App, uploaded to portal, or emailed by student. Student should check what they need to do to submit as self-reported scores.
School accepts scores sent by your counselor
School accepts a PDF copy of your scores emailed to the admissions office from your school counselor. This often requires an official school email address. If your counselor is unable to send the scores, SYE may be able to.
School accepts scores by Counselor or SYE
School accepts PDF copy of scores sent by SYE or your counselor.  SYE students: Fill out the payment form to request SYE to send your scores.
You will need to send official scores directly from the testing website. Because you are given free score sends when you register, you should use those sends. SYE students: if you require additional sends, fill out the payment form for SYE to send your official scores.
Universities often require some kind of financial document, whether they have need-based aid available or not. The CSS Profile costs money to submit so whenever there is an alternative option you should pursue it. We've done some research and identified where you can submit other forms. Here are the common options:
School requires CSS but does not provide waivers
School accepts alternative, school-specific form
We encourage you to confirm with each of your schools early as this process can take time.
You need to request a CSS waiver directly from the school, either via a form or email. Check the school website to confirm.
School requires CSS but does not provide waivers
You will need to request a CSS waiver from SYE via the payment form. These will only be provided to SYE students and only for universities with full scholarships. SYE occasionally has additional waivers to support non-SYE students.
The ISFAA is a paper version of the CSS profile. You can typically find this document linked on the university website and you will want to make sure you have the accurate year one.
School accepts alternative, school specific form
The school has an alternative form either available by email or in the portal. Check the school website for more details.