If you are not an SYE student but still interested in applying to universities, this page is for you. Follow the steps provided below:
. This course will introduce you to admissions, particularly at U.S. universities and will reference other pages on this site.
so you know when opportunities are available to non-SYE students.
We will post about application review and waiver availability.
What tests will you take? The SAT? The Duolingo English Test? The TOEFL? The IELTS? Make a plan early for how and when you hope to take these tests. SYE sometimes has waivers available, but not always.
What countries will you be applying to and what are the big deadlines?
for all students, but here is a structure you can follow loosely to understand what you should be doing each month.
This timeline focuses ONLY on U.S. admissions.
You should be considering non-US universities simultaneously and ensuring you do not miss deadlines for those applications.
You can start these activities prior to May.
Determine whether you will be taking the SAT and develop a study plan. Register for the test by the deadline.
Determine if you will be taking the Duolingo, IELTS or TOEFL and assess your level using a practice test. St a study schedule. Register for the test by the deadline.
Complete your brainstorming worksheets for the US Personal Statement. Begin to select a topic and write a first draft by the end of July.
Identify the teachers who will be serving as your recommenders and learn how you need to secure a transcript (and translated)
Begin to develop a college list. Add 5-10 schools to your list. Note down if you would like to apply Early Decisions to any of these schools.
Finalize your "early and priority" schools on your college list. Once you do so you can begin to identify the requirements for financial aid and documentation.
Make a spreadsheet or use the one provided under college research to track this.
You may need to request waivers or complete extra documentation.
Seek feedback on your Personal Statement. Keep revising it until you have a final version.
Develop a timeline for your supplemental essays so they don't sneak up on you.
Write your "activity list" and revise it.
By now, your Personal Statement and Activity List should be in a good shape, and you should already have your transcripts secured.
If you haven't already, you should be taking your English Language Proficiency Test.
Focus on writing your supplemental essays.
Finalize your entire college list by the end of November.
During these months you'll be submitting early applications.
At this point, almost all aspects of the application should be in progress. Keep working on refining your application essays and activity list, ensure all aspects of the Common Application are complete, and make sure that you've understood and begun the requirements for financial aid.
At the end of December, you'll be submitting your applications.
Most of your applications will be submitted. Now you need to ensure you're checking your
and you're not missing any requirements. You may need to upload additional financial information and documentation. Don't get lazy during these months as this is when it's critical to check your email and portal.